All right, everyone, okay, we're going to
get started and I want to introduce Kristina
Goodness, WHO will be our moderator for
today for this panel.
She's a special assistant to the UN Chief
Information Technology Officer and head of
the front office. So please welcome
Kristina Goodness.
Okay, thank you for your patience, just
checking how we doing.
I know this is the end of the day,but I
think we have a really excellent panel that
I really
look forward to walking you through.
As a first step, we're very, very honored
to include Roland Molera.
I hope I am saying this correctly.
The director of the UN Office of the High
Representative for
the Least Developed Countries
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small
Island Developing States.
That's an excellent acronym for you.
Please,please join me in welcoming the
speaker to speak on the work of thatoffice
andopen
source, please.
Many thanks andgood afternoon to you
all,excellent introduction and
the UNOHLS is that
acronym of the Office of the High
Representative forLeast Developed Countries
Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing
States, UNOHLS.
Excellencies,distinguished delegates,colleagues,I'm
very pleased to join you for
this very
important discussion on open source at the
United Nations.
I very much thank the organizers
forconvening this timely dialogue and
for bringing together
the UN system,member states and
the global innovation community around a
shared vision
of practical digital cooperation.
We meet at a moment of profound technical
change,technological change,science
technology
and innovation driven by rapid advances in
digitalization are reshaping how we
deliver
our mandates.
From artificial intelligence to
data-driven policymaking
these transformations are expanding
our ability to serve more effectively and
reach those furthest behind.
At the same time,they are requiring us to
rethink how we collaborate and
uphold our core
values of inclusion, transparency and
accountability.
This transformation is unfolding unevenly.
For the Least Developed Countries,the
LDCs,the Landlocked Developing Countries
the LLDCs
and the Small Island Developing States,the
SIDS,that UNOHLS serves
the digital divide
remains a persistent and structural
challenge.
While digitalization holds immense potential
access to its benefits remain limited.
The data illustrates this gap clearly -
only 34% of individuals in the LDCs and
38% in
LLDCs are using the internet.
SIDS perform better at 64%, but still
remain below the global average of 74%.
Internet access at modern 5G speeds
remains constrained.
95% of people in LLDCs,9% in LLDCs and
25% in the SIDS have access to 5G networks
compared
to a global average of 55%.
Affordability also continues to constrain
meaningful connectivity.
These realities underscore a central
question - how to ensure digital adoption in
ways that
are inclusive, affordable, and nationally
owned.
Excellencies, it is in this context that
open-source emerges as a compelling enabler.
Open Source provides a model of cooperation
that is at the heart of what we do at the
United Nations.
It promotes transparency,reduces costs,and
allows countries to adapt and
scale solutions
based on their own needs.
It also strengthens digital sovereignty by
giving governments greater national
ownership
over their digital systems.
It supports interoperability
andcollaboration
allowing institutions to deliver global
public
value more efficiently.
This vision is increasingly reflected in
system-wide efforts
including UN open-source
United framework,which marks an important
step forward,embedding openness
collaboration
and reuse at the core of our digital
transformation.
We at UN OHRLLS, we are working to
translate these principles into practice.
The SIDS Center of Excellence launched in
2024,promotes knowledge sharing
partnerships
and technology cooperation, including through
its technology and innovation mechanism.
In parallel,work is advancing towards an
online university forLDCs,as called for
under
the DOA program of action.
This initiative aims to expand access to
higher education at skill
and to address the tertiary
enrollment gap in LDCs, which stands at just
11%, compared to a global average of 40%,
with only 21% of graduates in STEM
disciplines.
We are also collaborating withpartners,including
UN ECE,to support LDCs,LLDCs
and SIDS
in leveraging UN open-source digital
public goods to facilitate,trade,and reduce
trade
and transport costs.
These efforts demonstrate how shared,open
and collaborative digital approaches can
help
overcome structural constraints, by pooling
resources, lowering costs, and expanding
access to knowledge and innovation.
Excellencies, looking ahead, the priority is
to move from principles to implementation.
Allow me to highlight four key directions.
First,strengthen regional
cooperation,particularly forSIDS,LDCs,and LLDCs
to pool resources
share expertise, and achieve economies of
skill.
Secondly, promote open and interoperable
digital public goods.
Public sector digitalization must be
sustainable, adaptable, and inclusive.
Third, invest in digital skills and
capacity building at skill.
Partnerships across governments, academia,
and the private sector will be essential to
equip people with the skills needed to
participate in and shape the digital economy.
And last, fourth, address affordability
and access barriers.
Innovative financing,targeted policy
support
and international support will be critical
to ensure that no country is left behind.
These priorities are fully aligned with the
Doha problem of action for LDCs, the Awasa
problem of action for LLDCs, and the Antigua
and Barbuda agenda for SIDS, all of which
recognize the transformative role of
science,technology
and innovation in advancing sustainable
development.
Excellencies in closing, open source is no
longer a niche or peripheral issue.
It is becoming central to how the United
Nations can deliver more effectively in a
connected
world.
For the countries we serve in our office
it offers a practical pathway to bridge
digital
divides, strengthen resilience, and
accelerate sustainable development.
The task ahead is clear, to translate this
potential into tangible, scalable outcomes
that respond to national priorities.
I thank you very much. Okay, thank you
Roland.
Good afternoon everyone,and welcome,on
behalf of the Office of Information and
Communications
Technology,one of the organizers,co-organizers
of this open source week
I am delighted to
welcome you to this panel on open source
at the UN.
We really just could not pass up the
opportunity to share the work that's going on
inside the
UN.
As Bernardo mentioned earlier this
morning,we must walk the walk
not just talk the talk.
Today you'll hear aboutthe innovative work
going on in the UN Secretariat
in the agencies
and the funds and the programs.
You'll also hear about some of the
challenges that we face.
These are not small challenges,as our
colleague just said
but hard problems perhaps are some
of the best to solve, and most worth
solving.
Importantly, I hope that we can share how
we in the UN and members of the global open
source community can continue to work
together.
It's not a new conversation, as many of the
speakers have said before, how we continue
to work on global challenges.
The UN Secretariat has long trusted and
relied on open source technologies to
power our most
critical infrastructure. This is not
abstract.
For many of us,on an individual level,our
teams
and our organizational successes have
been built on the foundations of open
source,including my own
my very own use of Berkeley
Unix at age 17, yes.
The work of the UN has long leveraged open
source components
and this is thanks to you
the open source community.
At the same time, we are in a very
specific moment in UN history.
We're working very hard to strengthen
collaboration across the system by co-chairing
the UN open
source community of practice,which brings
together colleagues from
across the UN family
to exchange experiences, coordinate efforts,
and, as Bernardo said, to go further faster
and advance the adoption of open source
urgently across our organizations.
I'm very much looking forward to moderating
today's discussion, and with that, let me
tune to our distinguished panelists.
Give me a moment. I invite the panelists
to come to the panel, to the stage.
First, I'll introduce Mr.
Guirm Kanella, the Director of the
Division for Digital Inclusion
and Policies and Digital Transformation at
UNESCO.
Then we have Sheeran Hamid
the Chief Information Officer of the
International Monetary Fund.
Vincent Jean Yves Martin, the Director of
the Office of Innovation, Food Agriculture
Organization of the UN, FAO, and, last but
absolutely not least, Mumtaz Tommem, Director
of Digital Impact Technology andInnovation
at the UN Relief andWorks Agency for
Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
Please join me in thanking and welcoming
the panel.
[applause] Okay, testing.
Okay, thank you. We will start the
discussion now.
But maybe let's start with one question.
Here we are in 2026, AI has supercharged
the open source environment, the technology
environment at large, and we have four
entities here, four very different mandates.
Maybe let's start a question for each one
of you, in turn, if you go first, Sheeran.
What does open source actually make
possible for you?
Are there examples you can share quickly
on open source and transformation?
Please. Well, thank you very much and
delighted to be here with all of you.
As you know,the IMF's mandate is to
promote global macroeconomic and
financial stability
and support to its members through policy
advice, financing, and capacity development.
So fromthe IMF,open source makes it
possible to move from
sharing information to enabling
capability, delivering value and impact,
and we've seen this evolved.
We've evolved fromopen data
which is key to making trusted
macroeconomic data accessible
to sharing analytical tools like growth at
risk, and now to AI-enabled tools such as
STAT, GPT, that allows countries to interact
with data more directly and adapt solutions
to their own context.
Ultimately,it enables transparency,adaptability,and
productivity,given the ability
forinstitutions
to build on each other's work, rather than
starting from scratch.
Thank you. Good afternoon, everyone,
pleasure to be here.
So UNESCO is a very complex organization.
As you probably know, it's different areas
of mandate.
So we are the UN Organization
forEducation,for Sciences,for Culture,and for
Communication
and Information.
So the open source discussion is both an
internal,interesting challenge
but also we have the
mandate to advise member states on those
topics.
I'm not on the internal side of the
conversation
I'm the side of advising on this topic.
So very briefly a few things that are part
of this conversation.
In the very first paragraph of our
Constitution,we have that
UNESCO has the mandate to promote
the free flow of information and ideas.
And as you can imagine, to achieve that goal,
one thing that is essential is to guarantee
the openness of the systems, otherwise you
can't do that.
So a few examples in our areas of mandate.
For example, we have a recommendation on
open science.
And you could see during the pandemic how
much open science was essential to reach
the
vaccines in all time.
So if we want to demonstrate the actual
impact of openness
this example has a massive demonstration
of impact.
On education
we have a specific legal document called
the Open Educational Resources that
some of you referred during those two
days.
And you can see examples across the border
of how much governments have been saving
only
to not need to pay more proprietary textbooks
in adopting open educational resources
in
their procurement services.
Another area thatwe are in charge is the
protection and
the stimulation of journalism.
So if you see cases of investigative
journalists all over the world impacting on
their investigations
for example, on corruption or human rights
violations, by using open data sources and
data sets, again, you can measure the
impact of the openness in the system.
And I could continue.
Also in the free and open source element,
you can see how governments have not only
saved in terms of procurement in using
open and
free software rather than proprietary
but also in terms of digital sovereignty.
So in a nutshell, we are trying to show to
our member states and advise them on this
value of, at the end of the day,
protecting the free flow of information.
Thank you. Thank you.
Yeah, so I'm from the Food and Agricultural
Organization of the United Nations.
I must say that there have been a real
paradigm shift in FAO for the last four years.
When we've been moving away from
developing individual digital solutions
toward what we
call this DPG-first approach,and I must
say that
these days we're also very much focusing
on a broader digital ecosystems approach
to make these solutions more adaptable and
scalable.
But to answer your question very precisely
whenyou say
what does it make actually possible?
So frommy perspective,what it makes
possible,it makes democratization of sense and
innovation
possible.
What I mean by that is that thanks to open
source approaches, we've been able to close
the science technology andinnovation gap
andbring the solutions,in my case
to smaller
the farmers that must need these kind of
innovations.
I can give you two examples, so the first
one, which is more at the global level, we've
developed this open forest platform
which helps members' state's tracks forest
management
environmental changes, and also to report
on their climate commitments.
This platform, which is open source, which
is one of our 11 DPG in FAO, is being used
over the world by 250,000 users now
and it's helping countries to make their
report on
their climate commitments.
So that's more the global national level.
But now,at the local level,when I say
closing the STI gap
we have what we call the digital
service portfolio, so the digital service
portfolio, which is also a DPG, which is open
source,is really bringing technical
knowledge to the farmers in terms of climate
in terms
of markets, in terms of lifestyle
production.
And thanks to having access to this
information,they can take informed decisions and
improve
their livelihood and production.
So we've got this shift in mindset in FAO
using more and more DPGs.
It's becoming totally natural and
promoting open source solutions.
And thanks to that,we've been able to
close the science technology and
innovation gap.
Thank you, and Mumtans? Yeah, thank you.
From UNRWA perspective,and UNRWA is an
agency specialized forproviding relief and
work
agency, mainly for the Palestinian
refugees.
So we are like a small government
providing services to a specific population
covering
education, health, and relief.
And often other sister organizations call
us like a mini UN
because we somehow do what
UNESCO does andwhat World Health Organization
does andwhat World Food Program does
et
cetera, but for a specific mandate.
So in our journey toward open source
adaptation, we can give a few examples.
I would refer to one whichis the most
recent one on providing a tool for
running the test
for Palestinian refugees in Gaza
wherethey've lost the schools
but yet they need to pass
an exam.
So without going intosoftware development
cycle or without going into
procurement process
we picked up a tool just fromoff the
shelf,from open source
and in a matter of one month
of work, we prepared this platform.
We teach the teachers how to put the test,
and we have run the authentication process
for the students to do the exams.
And it has to be sosimple in a way that
even the kids using the phones of their
parents
they can run the exam using the
authentication of their student ID and
their debt of birth
and we managed to run this test
successfully for around 230, 000 students.
And this was done in less than a month of
work.
Actually this improvement shows thatthe
impact was soquick,and the data and
the correction
of the exam results were done in a matter
of hours, not days.
And the data were linked to our enterprise
education management system
and the student
got their marks as well done all
automatic.
So this was a major achievement for
how fast you can use the open source
technology in
this regard.
The second example I would give,and that's
a very exciting example
is on the software
development cycle.
You will see thatthere are plenty of tools
now exist in the market on AI
it's an open
source AI on application development.
And it's not only for writing coding, but
it's for the whole life cycle, from business
requirements to mapping, to coding, to
testing, to user acceptance and testing.
All that life cycle is in that ecosystem.
So those are the two examples that I could
share with you from an on-work perspective.
>> Okay,there you have it,some very
concrete examples from
force management to education
and testing,and really serving the very
challenging mandates that
the UN has in these different
agencies with very, let's just say, resources
are, we are eager to find resources, okay,
resources.
I'll turn back to Guillermo, in UNESCO, you
mentioned the work on open science and as
it relates to open source and the promotion
of the work in UNESCO to promote the word
open across the board and
understand how the world's knowledge
really should be continued
to be championed to be open so that we can
further generations can benefit from it.
Maybe take us back
how would you say UNESCO's approach to
open source has evolved over time?
Is there a commentary,especially
considering collaboration
either within UNESCO or across
other organizations? How has that
evolution gone?
>> Thank you.
First, as we all may be realized, it's not
easy to be open and transparent, right?
I'll tell you a story.
This year, coincidentally, we are marking
the 260 anniversary of the first freedom of
information law in the world, that is the
Swedish law.
This law was approved in 1766.
The second law on freedom of information
was approved only 200 years later in 1966.
So you can see how governments,and we are
an intergovernmental organization
are reluctant
in being open and transparent.
And to continue that,in 1990,there were
only 10 countries with
this kind of legislation.
Good news today, they are 145.
So in the last 30 years,we had a super
expansion in this
at least this political willingness
for the openness and access to information
and open of knowledge and so on.
And then we have the world's sum of
information society and these and that.
So UNESCO also evolved through these same
waves of changes.
So for example, UNESCO was in charge of
the Universal Copyright Convention in 1962.
I don't know how many of you know that
the sea of the copyright was invented in
UNESCO.
So moving fromthat background to the
openness of open educational resources
creative commons
etc. is a big shift for the organization
and for its member states, etc.
So I would say, Christina, that one of the
key elements is precisely the ability and
the lessons learned to demonstrate how much
the openness of knowledge, of science, of
education, etc.
was central to the development agenda of
our member states and, in particularly
to good governance,a chief justice of this
country used to say that
the sunlight is the
best disinfectant.
So the more you have transparency andthat
this morning someone said that
you have more
security in many ways andthe open source
contributes a lot forthat,security for
everyone.
And you have more trust.
So it's a lot of what we are actually
desperate in need right now to keep protecting
andpromoting
in the system. Thanks. Perfect.
Thank you.
As you can see, the work takes many forms
to promote open knowledge and open source is
key to that. Maybe I'll turn to Mumtaz.
The open source building blocks underpin
the whole tech ecosystem
as many have mentioned
throughout the day.
Building tools during crisis
UNRWA delivers to millions of refugees
under very intense
resource pressures.
Could you maybe give us a couple of
concrete examples of open source?
You mentioned one around the testing
andeducation,but making something happen where
it wouldn't
happen at all otherwise. Yeah, thank you.
You know, the open source journey at UNRWA
is evolving.
So we picked the open source after,let's
say,the web development platform that
we had
but currently we are moving away fromusing
open source as
a tactical decision or opportunistic
decision to a more strategic dimension.
And the reason for that is a lot.
But I can give some examples there where
the geopolitical risk is real.
And you can see thata lot in the Middle
East area where
the tension goes on all directions.
And this is why the need forhaving
solutions ready on the ground for
business continuity
and resilience is a must for us.
And the third point is aboutthe vendor
lockdown andthe need forhaving that
kind of independence
as a sustainability is a key.
And hence,having all those tests of open
source solutions for
our ecosystem is much more needed.
This will provide us the flexibility
thatwe need andthe independence that
the UN agencies
needs to have in order to serve the whole
humanity because we should not be depending
on certain technology, certain vendors,
certain country to deliver our mandate.
Okay, this is a little bit of a turn of
the conversation.
That goes beyond some specific individual
examples andreally talking about
the digital
infrastructure at large, the productivity
suite, the entirety of the work environment.
It seems like there's some shifting going
on, I think that's been alluded in a couple
of cases. Maybe I'll turn to you, Sharon.
And we're in this moment of change, right?
As many have mentioned,turning to the
adoption of new technology,as we've seen with
AI
initial adoption sometimes is very easy,
you know, you turn something on.
But sustaining it is really hard.
And how has IMF approached to openness
evolved fromdata and
tools to more advanced digital
capabilities? And what did you do to kind
of make it stick?
Very good question.
And I'll tell you that,you know,in the
context of building technologies that
are durable
I don't think that's a single factor out
there.
You know, I think the core ingredient, I
look at it in terms of the top three elements
that we need to move together,one is
aboutstrong governance andpolicy foundation
right?
Here we're talking about licensing
arrangements.
Manta's talk about, you know, lockdown, you
know, we don't want to be beholden to one
organization, so we need to make sure that
the standards and the approaches that we take
gives us a variety of options forus to be
able to deliver on a mandate and
objectives.
At the same time, you know, we have to
also look at data sensitivity, right?
With data privacy and data being out there,
we need to make sure that we have a strong
policy in place to actually understand
what are the data risk and
how we protect the information
and data that is being provided to the
fund for the use of our members.
And then the thought is to actually look
at it from a risk management perspective.
We need to make sure thatin all context of
how we deliver our technology and
our platform
we look at it with an enterprise risk
lens.
And here at the end of the day, you have
to have an appreciation.
The mandate of the fund is about making sure
that we are on macroeconomic policy and at
the same time, financial stability.
If we don't build technology thatis
durable,right
it has significant impact to country
and the country's macroeconomic and
financial posture.
So for us, we need frameworks to make sure
that we ensure trust, clarity and at the same
time, consistency across how we use our
capabilities.
Second, I'll say it's about institutional
collaboration.
To build durable technology, a lot of us
think it's just about the technologies.
The technologies are going to come intothe
technology andwe have a good system for
everyone.
That's not purely true.
To actually deliver a robust anddurable
technology
what we need to do is actually
collaborate.
And here the collaboration is actually the
village and
the village is what we're talking
about is ensuring your legal posture is in
place, your business and the subject matter
expertise are in place,you have the
technical expertise in place aswell as
what I call an
alignment with the organization.
It has to align withthe organization's
mandate,it has to align with
the priorities of the
organization. So we can't look at this in
a fragmented approach.
And then finally,in terms of
sustainability,open source is not about
building a technology
putting it out there and hopefully
somebody is going to use it, adapt it.
It doesn't work that way.
Arguably,what you need to do is still
continue to maintain,support and
evolve the technology
over time. I will tell you that it's not
an easy journey to make it your durable.
If you have a technology that is open source
and you put it out there, but the solution
actually depends on specialized
infrastructure,talent
specific talent or external systems
then technically what you think is
open,it's not necessarily open because
it's not truly
usable or sustainable in many contexts.
So more broadly in terms of challenges
we still have what I call capacity
constraints
we still have fragmentation that actually
happens that remains an important barrier to
us moving forward.
So there you go, community, these are some
really important words I think because as
we mentioned before,we're very reliant
anddependent on our collaboration with
the open
source community in the UN and this is
what it takes to make it stick.
So hopefully this can be taken to heart
food for thought, certainly for all of us.
Vincent, if I can turn to you, perhaps
let's bring you in to speak to the field.
We're here at headquarters in New York and
this big beautiful room.
But fromyour background andfrom your
experience
what was the single greatest challenge to
implementing open source projects from
your experience?
I'm thinking aboutchallenges maybe across
regions,across agencies and
introducing innovations.
Yeah,and I would like to build a little
bit on what Shereen was saying because
I think
it was very important to talk about these
ecosystems around these solutions.
But just before I gave you two examples
whichwere quite successful,I mean one which
was
more at the global level buthow it has
been used at the national level
open forests and
another one thathas been deployed in
several countries which
is our digital service portfolio.
It started in two countries,now it's in I
don't know 10,15 countries and
it's accessible
to farmers andyou truly,I mean in their
own languages andso on and
so forth considering
also the digital literacy and so on and so
forth.
But I could give you plenty of examples or
why it failed and we failed really flat.
Even if it was open source, even if it was
a DPG, it didn't work and why it didn't work
and this is something I've seen everywhere
I've been working from
Asia to Africa to Latin
America is problems of adoption and scale.
And it was mentioned already by Shereen
andGuillerme becausewe think because
it's open
it's going to benefit people equitably but
it's not.
Because it's open it's going to be used
and adopted and scaled, no.
So the thing is thatit needs to be accompanied
by investment in skills,in governance
in
capabilities, in capacities and so on and
so forth.
So I think the surrounding environment, the
ecosystems around these solutions is more
important than the technology itself
basically.
And that's why now in FAO we're not so
rigid on the being open and not being open.
We believe in DPGs and so on and so forth
but we're not taking it in a rigid way, more
in a flexible way.
We first look at what is the problem we're
trying to solve and what kind of solutions
we can put into place by strengthening the
ecosystems.
So I've got three kind of examples I would
like to share.
So from the local level, how do we
overcome this problem of adoption?
We had several techniques but
one of them is to use social sciences
including behavioral
science to really understand what are the
barriers to adoption before starting
anything.
And then you do your intervention and then
you can measure the impact afterwards but
from a social perspective anda social
scientist perspective you can look at it and
that's
a way we prevent a lot of failures from
adoption to scale.
So the second one I wanted to mention also
is because
here we are all UN agencies together.
We don't talk much about what we do
together.
Well I think it's really important thatthe
direction wherewe should aim at and
last week
we just launched a global initiative on AI
for agri-food systems to be there with ITU,
WFP, EFAD and FAO.
So I wanted to mention it becausein FAO we
already have our roadmap on AI for
agri-food
systems butwe believe thatjoining forces
with
other UN agencies looking at this
governance
mechanism, data sharing agreements, use
cases that are important is the way forward.
So that's why we launched this global
initiative and
finally last point is we are launching
this year a project called Mainstream in
Sub-Saharan Africa and
we are going to establish scaling
innovation hubs in different parts of
Africa withthe idea of the main value that
we bring
to this project is strengthening these
ecosystems of innovation.
Well certainly some large challenges as we
were as was mentioning at the beginning you
know the agri-food system open source
across regions,across entities that
is certainly
not a small challenge but
yes the hard ones are perhaps the ones
most worthy of solving.
I also heard sort of strains of conversation
around the responsibility of protection
really
extending to open source technology
andtechnology stacks at large and
how we permeate these
values intothe things thatwe build is
really important especially as
we are interdependent
essentially to tackling these global
perhaps programmatic challenges but
then using the
tools that we have at hand.
I think we're coming up on the end of our
panel so maybe what I'll do is a lightning
round, if you'll bear with me, a last word
for each of our panelists and maybe we'll
start with you, Mumt has a work away this
way.
In one sentence you know we build a lot of
our projects in isolation.
Hopefully that's changing.
I think actually all of you did say it was
changing but
if you were to turn to the entity
sitting next to you or turn to any of the
participating organizations that are in the
audience,maybe what would be the one
collaboration that
you would ask the open source community
both in and outside of the UN to work on
from your perspective.
One sentence. One sentence.
Okay. Thanks. No, thanks.
You know a few years ago we had the priority
number one was you know 100 Cloud first
right?
So that was you know.
Now we need to shift thatinto open source
first wherepossible and
where possible because
we need to be realistic on what we can
achieve and the change cycle.
It's not something thatyou can do
overnight,it's an involvement and
certainly that's something
we cannot do it alone, agency by agency.
We need to have a more collaboration
across this in more research and
development towards
certain projects and activities to move
this forward.
Perfect.
Yeah
I mean I think this is what I was saying
just before our challenge today is not
simply
promoting open source.
We need to do the hard work now across
organization,across institution partnerships
andso on
so forth.
So I think that's really the key message
and
because you were asking what would you ask
the community it's I would ask them to join
us to join this global initiative on AI
for
agri-food systems.
A very worthy cause coming growing up on a
farm myself a very worthy cause.
And Guillermo?
I think thatwhat Vincent said before about
the meaningful connection of the real
people
is our challenge because
even of course if open source is different
of proprietary technology
at the end of the day we were quite
successful in connecting people to the greed.
But still essential elements forguaranteeing
these processes meaningful for
them like for
example multilingualism.
Like the content is a content that makes
sense to their own reality.
In those areas we are still far away of
what is needed.
So I guess it's a collective invitation
because in UNESCO we also have these issues.
How we actually reach thatlast mile but
in a meaningful way I think this is our
collective
challenge including in the new development
agenda post 2030 this is it and it's not
it's easy to say not easy to do.
That's why we need this collective
thinking here to advance.
Very good and lastly Sharon.
Well I'm glad you say it's a sentence
because
the sentence can actually be a long one.
So here what I would say in terms of
collaboration to within the open source
community is I'm
going to look at it a little bit differently
I think it's moving beyond just sharing
your
code andyour model andhere move to what I
call building the capabilities as
a community.
And when you build this as a community make
sure that it's trusted, it's reusable right
and other organizations if not countries
can use thatwith confidence and
in doing that
you have to do that by aligning on what I
call a shared platform or platforms right.
Some common licensing arrangements thatcan
benefit everybody andthen begin with
always
the end in mind that's what my husband
always say right or when he proposed to me.
It's always begin withthe end in mind
andthis is by designing forreuse from
the onset.
Don't think thatyou're building an open
source just for
yourself or a specific purpose or
an objective but at the end what do you
want to get out of this.
It's naturally easier to share and
actually look on the onset what the
barriers are when
you look aboutdoing thatsocial testing and
understanding what are the barriers to
entry.
Go with that end in mind and then so that
you can actually understand how to fix the
problem upfront rather than the util in.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank you so much.
I think you know looking towards the next
seven generations as
some people say is really
the goal here and we really look forward to
working together with you the open source
community. So please let us thank our
panelists and thank you.
And thank you very much. It's a wrap.
Wow.
Thank you so much and it's amazing to hear
what everything that's happening within the
UN be it IMF or UNESCO, FAO or UNRWA or
even office of ICT.
We have in addition a community of practice
that brings all of us all the UN agencies
together so please feel free to engage.
We have six,seven members of the community
in the room if you want to talk about
anything.
But one more time please.
You can do better than that.
Big round of applause for our family.
So we have now,we're aboutto start this
other panel about,I forgot
open source across
a level of governance and
we're going to kick it the panel by a
video message by Veronica
Gafish is the Director General of Digit,
the European Union Director General of IT.
Thank you, Under Secretary General and Envoy
on Technology, dear Amundi, for inviting me
to open this panel.
It's a pleasure to return to what has
evolved in just a few years fromthe OSPOs for
good
symposium intoa fully fledged UN open
source week bringing together participants
fromacross
the world. That evolution tells us
something important.
Open source is now central to the digital
policy agenda.
Cities,regions,national governments and
international organizations increasingly
face the same question.
How do we remain in control of the digital
systems on whichour public services
economies
and democracies depend?
For us at the European Commission
this question is at the heart of
technological sovereignty.
Not sovereignty through isolation or
closed systems, quite the opposite.
It is abouthaving meaningful choices,cooperating
froma position of confidence and
ensuring
that our digital assets remain
secure,resilient,interoperable andaligned with
our democratic
values.
This is why the European Commission has
proposed its tech sovereignty package
including the
EU Open Digital Ecosystem Strategy.
That's our new open source strategy.
Today,I would like to focus on one key
objective,promoting open and
interoperable digital
ecosystems for public administrations as a
foundation for strategic independence across
all layers of governance.
For the European Commission,we have
developed a practical framework that
others may wish
to draw on.
Digital sovereignty cannot be achieved
through
a single technology choice or one-off
decision.
It must be embedded in how public
administrations design,procure,operate and
maintain digital
systems.
Our framework rests on three pillars, trusted
digital assets that are secure, reliable
and reusable, capabilities and communities
to sustain them over time, and governance
that keeps technology choices aligned with
long-term public interests.
Together these pillars support digital
ecosystems thatare both technically sound and
institutionally
sustainable.
But open digital ecosystems are not only
aboutsoftware,they are also aboutcapacity
stewardship
and avoiding future dependencies through
today's decisions.
Public authorities should not only be
users of technology
they should also be contributors
partners and co-creators of the systems on
which they depend.
This transition requires trusted partnerships
and collaboration across borders.
In Europe, we are already putting these
foundations in place.
My services facilitate a growing EU
hospital network
bringing together public administrations
to exchange practices, align approaches and
strengthen capacity around the sustainable
use and governance of open source.
We are also investing in shared digital
assets.
The EU open source solutions catalog helps
administrations discover and
reuse public sector
open source solutions, reducing
duplication and accelerating innovation.
New forms of cooperation are also emerging
through initiatives such as the edX, that's
the European Digital Infrastructure
Consortium.
We have the Digital Commons edX andthe
IMPACT edX
where member states are pooling resources
and expertise to jointly develop
interoperable digital capabilities and
strengthen collective
resilience.
This ecosystem approach also connects to
the Commission's broader technological
sovereignty
agenda.
Through initiatives such as the forthcoming
Cloud and the AI Development Act, or CADA,
we aim to strengthen resilience in
strategic digital infrastructure while
preserving meaningful
choices and reducing excessive
dependencies.
The Commission is also seeking to lead by
example.
Earlier this year, we introduced sovereignty
requirements into a major sovereign cloud
procurement forEU institutions
and we developed a sovereign cloud
framework to help organizations
assess and strengthen digital resilience.
Europe's strength in the digital age does
not lie in going alone.
It lies in collective action.
And this spirit of cooperation extends
well beyond Europe's borders.
Through the UNITU open-source ecosystem
enabler initiative
supported by the European Union
we are helping to establish open-source
program offices beyond Europe
including in Trinidad
and Tobago, where early successes already
demonstrate the value of open collaboration
in strengthening digital capabilities.
Let me conclude with one final thought.
Strategic independence is not a challenge
forone institution
one level of government
or one region alone.
It is a shared responsibility across the
public sector,from cities and
regions to national
government and international
organizations.
The technologies on whichwe depend are
becoming more interconnected and
essential to our
societies. This makes cooperation not
simply desirable but necessary.
Strategic independence should therefore
not be understood as standing apart.
It is the ability to cooperate froma
position of confidence with
meaningful choices and
shared stewardship over the digital
foundations on whichour public services
economies and
democracies increasingly depend.
Thank you very much.
There was a video message from Ms.
Veronica Gaffey, WHO couldn't be with us
here today,
but insisted to have her message addressed
to the room.
Our next keynote speaker would be Mr.
Keith Bergeld, he is the chief executive
officer
of Open Innovation Network.
And after that we start our last panel.
Thanks very much. It's a pleasure to be
here in honor, actually.
As I was thinking aboutwhat I wanted to
say
I wanted to share a little bit of my
reflections
on what we've heard a little bit during
the week andalso just take stock on where
we've
come from.
40 years on,since Richard Stallman founded
Genu Linux
we are in the throes of a movement
that sometimes we don't think about
because we're just actively participating.
This movement is one that
is really something much more profound
than I think even many
people when they talk about open source
really can appreciate, at least in my view.
And I'm a guardian of open source, and so
it's something that I think about all the
time.
I want to make sure thatpeople can adopt
open source technology because
when OIN was founded
21 years ago,there was a real threat
thatwas posed by large companies that
owned significant
patent portfolios,and we wanted to be able
to reduce thatrisk and
encourage more companies
to feel comfortable adopting open source
technology.
And soin this guardian role,I think
aboutkind of wherewe come from
where we're going
and this notion of taking stock.
To me, this is a social movement.
It just happens to produce technology,
which is why it's irreversible.
There's an inevitability
aboutparticipation,whether you're a country
whether you're a
company, a public sector, private sector,
there's a movement that's inexorable toward
collaborative development,which is one of
the critical components and
tenets of open source.
We collaborate to compete more
effectively.
The concept of co-opetition was -- there
were many
many articles in the Harvard Business
Review, MIT Journal, and books written on
the idea of co-opetition during the'90s.
Whatever has co-opetition found at its home,
more so than in the arena of open source.
This social movement embraces the idea
thatwe cooperate,we collaborate
and we produce
something that we couldn't produce
independently.
And we can only do it becausewe come
together,we collaborate,and we think about
how we
solve problems in software together.
We don't think about-- the first thing we
think about
is not to solve it independently
but we think about it.
What are the ways thatI can build on
someone else's ideas that
have already been established?
And what it takes is a certain level of
humility,and this is something that
all of us need
to practice in the community.
We always need to step back andthink about
how we can be better by distilling the
collective
intelligence of a population of people
around the world
not just around our company or
around our neighborhood if we're in Silicon
Valley or at 128 or if we're in Sofia
and
Tiplos or wherever else in the world.
We are collaborating,and we are --
throughthe process of collaboration
we have engaged
and incited a group of people,the open
source program office directors
that have carried
the message,have done so
many different things to be able to
advance the message inside companies
inside governments,to be able to awaken
people to the notion of value and
how value is created
in the new economy.
We are -- I think the concept was
developed -- Brian Arthur,an economist
commented on
Ken Arrow's work on increasing returns
about18 years ago in an article that
stuck with
me,and whenI got intoopen source 19 years
ago,it made me kind of think about
the whole
idea.
One plus one plus one doesn't equal
three,it equals six or 10 or 20 when
we bring smart
people together and allow them to solve
problems in software.
This is a critical component of value that
every day we are involved in, every day we
see people communicating with each other,
CEOs have no idea WHO their team members are
communicating with, how they are
communicating, what they are communicating.
They only know thatby having this
unbridled capacity to collaborate
we are doing things
that we couldn't do and we are innovating.
What the -- there are lots of articles
thathave been written over the years
but Clayton
Christensen probably at Harvard was one of
the best oracles of this message that
we bring
the outside in to be able to enrich our
environments andour organization so
that we can bring
new ideas in.
We see time andtime again acquisitions of
new companies don't get it done
joint ventures
don't get it done,multi-party
collaborations don't get it done
but open source does get
it done, it increases the level of innovation
that we are able to access and it changes
the way we create value in the new
economy.
Ospos are a key component thatpeople --
I've seen them evolve over these 19 years
andI've
seen the Japanese team thatwas up was
talking about
the next generation of Ospos because
I can remember one Fujitsu founded the
first open source program office director
position
in Japan probably about20 years ago was
right before I arrived on the scene and
I thought
about how this role has evolved in preparation
for making these preliminary comments.
I see that the increased kind of importance
of these individuals and the role that they
play with humility, they're not just like I
think Jim Zemlin spoke to you earlier, Mike
Belinkovich will speak to you in a little
while on the panel.
These are people WHO
are doing really significant things to be
able to create what I'll call
project-based innovation, which is the most
powerful force for innovation in the world
right now that's not talked about, but
that's how we innovate.
We get together in projects,we have
talented people that
are managing these projects that
we bring in,that develop processes and
procedures to be able to allow people to
come together
and to be able to create something that
would not be available or accessible
without this
notion of collaboration that's so central.
And so you think about the idea of their
Ospos are translators.
They take a message andthey translate it
they help provide kind of a conversion of
raw
ideas andconcepts andmake it salable,make
it palatable to individuals that
are potentially
leaders of companies,CTOs,deputy
CTOs,heads of software andother individuals
not only
in their own companies, but across the
industries that they participate in.
There are oracles in their own way of the
message of how powerful open source is.
And then they're communicators,they
provide a vision,a set of norms
a code of conduct
around how we participate in a community
which
has the twin components of opportunity and
obligation. We have an obligation to
participate in a certain way.
We have an obligation to lift each other
up.
It's not Fujitsu competing against
Hitachi.
It's about both companies raising each other
up with processes and procedures that help
us to be able to redefine what innovation
is andto accelerate the capacity for
innovation
that only open source unlocks.
Their advocates, very often they've had to
fight inside companies, particularly early
on in the history of open source
to be able to have people become aware of
the importance
of this movement that is open source.
Many people in senior positions inside
companies get to some
they get some extent of it,but
they don't get it all.
They don't truly understand the power of
open source asI'm describing it and
as I understand
it. They're educators.
They're not just communicating a message
and establishing norms and a sense of WHO we
are and how we participate and what the
expectations are in this community.
They're educating people all the
time,they're creating a sense of value
and they're also
doing things that other people can't do.
There's a special, again, a special sense
of learnorship that I find and I found from
the beginning in these individuals WHO are
connectors.
They provide a bridge between the outside
project communities and the inside parts of
the organization, and it's all parts of
the organization that they touch.
I think Brian Prophet wrote a great piece
that's on the website on what is an OSPO
how do
they operate,and I think it's a really
instructive piece thathas you see and
understand what
OSPOs do on a daily basis,how they
contribute,and the incredible value that
they have.
OSPOs in the private sector, I believe as we
head into this panel, provide an invaluable
role as source of knowledge and awareness
that is invaluable for the public sector to
adopt and understand so that we can all be
singing from the same team sheet.
We can all be understanding the power of
open source asa social movement that
produces
innovation thatis of incredible
significance and
import to all of us in every sector and
every industry where we find software.
And sowith that,I'll also mention that
next week I'll be announcing in Japan on
the 30th
that we will be starting a special
initiative to work with
OSPOs to allow them to participate
in an extension of their incredibly
important role in companies by having them
understand
through some software thatwe've developed
wherethe gaps are
where we should be providing
more protection and
coverage in their companies by auditing on
a regular basis how much code
is being used, what licenses they've done
under, the compliance and governance role
that they perform is invaluable, often
working with lawyers inside their companies.
But what they're doing is now going to be
extended to allow them to identify the
gaps.
Where are they using technology
thatwe,OIN,are not protecting and
then nominating that
so that we can protect fully the scope of
open source technology that's being used.
And so I could not do this with just people
from the Office of General Counsel or from
the IP departments.
I need to use people WHOhave this unique
access across the company and
a unique understanding
as true believers.
And these are the people thatI rely
on,these are the people that
are my greatest advocates
in companies all around the world,not just
in Japan whereI've spent years as
a diplomat
but everywhere in the world.
And so this is a great resource.
This resource needs to be utilized now to
be able to ensure that
we are spreading this
common sense of knowledge, awareness, and
distilling this collective intelligence and
sharing it. Thank you very much.
Wow. Thank you so much, Keith.
It's incredible to see thatthe go back
through
the history of all these human
interactions
that are involved for
us to be able to reach too like Linux is
literally millions of human
interactions. Not code. Forget about the
code.
It's the size of a community and ones and
ones that took place for us to be able to
use those digital goods that are changing
everybody's life with that.
I'm happy to call for the last panel of
the day.
Last panel of the day. Please bear with
us.
It's the strategic independence across
layer of governance.
So I'm going to call on our panelists and
please feel free to come in.
So we have Anne Catherine Riedel, so she's
the managing director of Next in Germany.
And she will moderate our panel today.
We have Dr.
Indra,Pradana Singh,what Sigrinata
he's the secretary general of the Asia
Productivity
Organization. Please join us, sir.
But Eun Barker,Eun Choi Barker
she's the deputy director general of
information technology
department at the Asian Development Bank.
We have with us, of course, Mr.
Mike Milankovic, executive director of the
Eclipse Foundation.
Nithya, Nithya Ruff, she's the chair of
the Linux Foundation Board.
And then Brian, Brian Billendorf,
independent advisor and board director.
Thank you. Thank you, Mar.
It's a great honor for me to moderate the
final panel of this conference today.
And without further ado,I'd like to directly
start andintroduce my panelists with
their
first question.
So we will talk about strategic
independence across layers of governance.
And as Omar said, I'm from Germany, it's a
big discussion in my country.
And as Ms.
Gaffay said, also in the European Union
currently, so I'm happy that we will
discuss this panel here withleaders
frominternational organizations and
industry leaders.
And I'd like to start with you, Dr.
Indra Pradana Singh, you are the 13th
secretary general of
the Asian Productivity Organization and in
your second term.
And one of your tasks is in your position
to encourage your member states to use AI,
to boost productivity and help them build
capacity in emerging industries.
So what role does open source play in this
work and what does strategic independence
mean for the work with the countries
you're working with in general?
Thank you, Anne. Good afternoon, ladies
and gentlemen, colleagues, all the experts.
I'm Indra Singh Aminata
so APO is an Asian Productivity
Organization established in 1961.
Now we are consists of 21 member economies
from Asia, from the advanced country, Japan,
emerging ASEAN, and LDCs.
Jump into the answer to your question,
Anne.
So at the moment,yes,starting
2022,actually APO by the request and
demanding coming from
our governing body in 21 members
they would like to transform our
methodology of the productivity
that in the past after six decades,we are
doing the productivity methodology
productivity
training in the manual and the basic.
Now we would like to transform in AI.
We have terminology coming from Anne.
First is the open source itself.
Frankly speaking,it's very help of our
member economies and
by the data of APO is already
can show that by having the open sources AI
implementation, of course, this is not from
the whole members countries, because we have
a 21 with the various level of economies,
at least for the emerging countries WHO are
very hungry and thirsty of this technology,
we can already can proof these three years
by having our demo company projects and
our
capacity bringing projects,we can have the
result and
the result is reducing the costs
quite significantly.
Now we talk aboutstrategic independence
withthe open source also is very help
very much
help to the members government,because by
having these open sources now
the government
in each of our member countries, they can
choose.
Now they have an option,not only one or
two big players
but they have an option to choose
the open sources system,the AI system
thatmatch fit with
the needs of their development
countries.
By having said that,to adopt the
tools,it's quite easy
but actually to have the ecosystem
that I mentioned last in a Monday,the
ecosystem is very,very much important
it's a stage
of end-to-end awareness, adoption, skills
up to upgrade it and finally come out with
the regulatory framework,because
innovation,I'm in APO,almost four years in APO
I can
see how the gaps, how the disparity within
our members is still there, which is okay,
because all the states have their own
states of development
but what I'm trying to say
is two things.
When they're adopt, it is very good for
them if they can follow up with two things.
The workers' skills, ability upgrading and
second, follow up with regulatory framework.
Thank you. Thank you, Dr. Indra, and I'd
like to introduce to you Yoon Choi-Baka.
She's the Deputy Director General of
Information Technology Department of the Asian
Development
Bank,and you're based in Manila,but you
work before here at the UN and
supported the UN
Secretary's General UN 2.0 vision with your
work here, among other things, and also to
you,what does strategic independence mean
forthe work with
the countries the ADB works
with, and what does open-source play for a
world?
Great.
Thank you so much, Anne Catherine, and good
afternoon to all of you WHO's staying with
us until the very last session.
Thank you somuch forthat
and I'm very honored to be in this very
distinguished panelist
for this important session.
So asyou said,I have recently moved to
Asian Development Bank,and from
our perspective
strategic independence does not mean
countries necessarily own or build their own
technology
and all the various technologies that they
use to provide services to their citizens.
For us,it means really enabling the
government to set their digital priorities
making informed
decisions,and being able to ensure
thatthey are not locked into
a specific vendor or specific
platforms thatmay be difficult to get out
later on
and being able to have the flexibility
and the freedom to do what is best
fortheir overall parties and
strategy of the government.
And this also is very important to our
developing countries, as Dr.
Indra just mentioned, because
now more andmore
all our public services are really
depending on the digital systems
and especially artificial intelligence has
become what everybody is leveraging and
having
the hunger and the desire to incorporate in
all the various services that deliver and
various social matters, whether it be climate
or healthcare, education, and so on and so
forth.
So we believe thatopen source,with its
transparency,reusability,local adoption
and continuous
improvement,and thatthe various
communities and
all the different groups provide to
continue
to keep it up to date andeven more
robust,potentially
than some of the other vendor-provided
platform,this is really a great
opportunity formany countries
especially developing countries
WHO may not have the economic means to be
able to purchase those products and
platforms
that are provided by some of the few or
global companies that
can potentially be locked into.
This is wherethe open source is something
thatwe continue to encourage for
its transparency
reusability,and soon andso forth,so this
is also where
the multi-development banks such
as ADB comes intoplay
and we not only provide support around
helping the government to choose
the right technology, and open source, of
course, is one of those as well, but making
sure thatthey are equipped to make the
right decisions and
their overall strategies aligned
to the platform choices that they make.
So open source by itself is not a means to
-- it's not an end to it by itself as
a technology
solution,but really it should be linked to
their broader digital strategy
digital direction
of the government and the various
countries.
In thatcontext,that we really want to not
prescribe specifically aswe work with
different
member countries around what they need to
do,but really more of equipping them and
providing
an enabling environment andecosystem
around capability building
around providing various
options forthem to pick from,as well as
the full lifecycle of managing digital
solutions
and platforms.
It's not just about
the launch itself or leveraging a specific
software or specific datasets
but about how to continue to evolve and be
flexible around leveraging the insights on
the different platforms andthe datasets
thatthey're using to ensure that
the government
is making the right decision for the public
interest and for continuing to support the
sustainable and inclusive and resilient
development impact.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Jun.
I'd like to bring in Brian Bellendorf to
the discussion.
We're an independent advisor anda nerd
diplomat,as you call yourself
and I just learned
you co-founded the Apache web server
project andgave it its name
a very interesting story
and you switched through the sectors during
your career and have, therefore, an inside
and outside perspective on government,so
in your point of view
what should governments
focus on regarding strategic independence
and
what has changed in the discussions over
the years? Thank you.
Yeah, I've been fortunate enough to have
played early and/or significant roles in a
number of different open-source foundations
in Apache, in the Linux Foundation, and in
the Mozilla Foundation
and all three of those are very different
in their theory of change
and the way thatthey operate andin their
sustainability models
and recurring throughout
all three of those has been this desire,and
a desire in my part,to think about
longevity
like how do we build not just the
technical infrastructure that
societies can reliably
build upon andnot worry aboutthe rug being
pulled out fromunderneath them
the following
year, or for all the support
infrastructure on that to disappear?
How can they know how to participate in
the road mapping of that
and know how to depend
upon it going forward?
When I think aboutgovernment engaging in
open-source and
building lots of open-source technologies
and I worry,I worry that
any one of the member states of the UN is
one bad election away
from a chainsaw-wielding rocket man
walking in anddeciding thatthat thing that
had been
built inside the government was no longer
necessary, and so I've also played roles at
the World Economic Forum,I worked in the
Obama White House just before the USDS and
18F were
set up,which are fantastic
we're fantastic things to stand up to try
to build in-house
capacity inside the US government for this,
and I've seen them inspire digital service
teams across lots of different countries
inside of lots of different states
and I think those
have been critical to demonstrate a new
way of engaging withtechnology
the governments
can engage withtechnology andtry to up-level
the engagement withthe private sector
but
I think it's really critical
thatgovernment view
determine a very productive relationship
to have with private sector actors WHO can
be part of delivering that last mile of the
solution.
In fact,if we characterize this type of
organization as
a digital delivery services firm,that
could be an outside provider of
thatsolution,it could be a small company
it could be a
large systems integrator,or it could be an
in-house team
but they play this pivot role.
Pivoting between delivering the value for
a government customer to the citizens or
other
stakeholders on one side, but also pivoting
upstream and working with an open source
foundation or just an open source project
to try to make sure thatnot only that
they're
getting the value,but thatthey're also
contributing to the long-term health of that
project.
And I think key to figuring out then,to
get back to the question,the ability for
countries
to be self-sufficient in their technology
to not be beholden to vendor capture, not
be beholden to proprietary software
the key is figuring out how to enable the
kinds of
vendors WHOare going to do the right thing
the kinds of digital delivery service
teams
whether in-house or outside,and giving them
an advantage in the procurement process
in
the technology selection process,and
trying to really systematize that
relationship so
that as a country, no matter what size you
are, large or small, you have optionality
when it comes to supporting the digital
public goods that
you're deploying inside of your
organization. Lots more to say than I'll
pause there.
Thank you, Brian.
And I'd like to welcome around Nithya Ruff
she's the chair of the Linux Foundation
board
and one of the world's most recognized
open-source leaders.
You worked in the industry andnow a lot
withuniversities
and the same question to you
what should governments focus on in terms
of strategic independence, and maybe as you
are also a pioneer of the hospital movement,
maybe you can focus also on that and your
answer. Thank you. Thank you, Anne,
Catherine.
And thank you all for staying to listen to
this very important discussion.
I think there have been a lot of shifts that
have happened over the last 20, 30 years,
particularly in the last 10 years.
Open-source for governments used to be
more about cost, more about procurement.
And today it's aboutstrategic
infrastructure,not just a procurement category
but having
witnessed some of the fragile supply chain
issues during the pandemic
looking at geopolitical
fragility thatwe experience today andalso
tensions,the acceleration of AI
all of these
have resulted in digital sovereignty being
a public policy issue
not just a technology
preference.
And I think thatanother shift has happened
in the 10 years or more ago
people used to
just consume open-source,but the most
important shift that
I'm seeing happening is people
are saying,I need to contribute,I need to
be at the table
I need to steward open-source
I need to not just be a consumer.
I love the example of Germany's sovereign
tech fund.
The European Commission has also taken a
stance on owning open-source and
contributing to open-source.
When your staff are upstream
contributors,they know how the code works
they have influence
in the communities that shape it, and they
have genuine options when things go wrong.
I think reforming procurement has also
been another shift that
I have seen governments
make andI think that's a very
very positive shift that's happening to
say open first.
Until procurement changes, open-source
always has remained marginal in the past.
The last couple of things I'll say is I've
seen a shift in building internal
capacity
and we've heard fromso many ministers in
the past two,three days that
they're actually
building capacity to be engaged.
Yes, it's unglamorous, but it's a
foundational capacity that you need.
Strategic independence does not come
fromjust consuming or saying that
you have a policy.
If you,in complete technical workforce,are
contractors
when they leave your knowledge
leaves and you don't have independence,
you continue to have a dependence.
I'm glad to see some of the regulations that
are also happening, the CRA and the AI Act
and the interoperability requirements.
That creates a policy environment thatactually
supports independence in ways that
did not
exist in the past.
So, I'm seeing a lot of great changes that
are happening and Catherine from a government
perspective.
I think OSPO's can serve really asa
function to direct some of these changes and
to connect
all of the institutions across government
so
that we don't have silos in a lot of these
different areas andto really connect it
from
procurement to legal to business to
external
communities.
So, those are some of the things that I
would say government need to do.
Thank you so much, Nithya.
And I'd like to welcome Mike Milinkovic.
You're the Executive Director of the Eclipse
Foundation and you are, of course, also a
recognized industry leader and open source
community champion.
And this morning Adriana Groh said that
the open source community literally run
the world.
Do you agree with her and what is your
take on the open source community?
And their strategic role,their role on
strategic independence that
governments strive for?
That's a lot to unpack. Well, first of
all, thank you for having me.
I really appreciate it.
For those WHO don't have never heard of the
Eclipse Foundation, we're the 22-year-old
organization five years ago.
We moved our domicile fromthe United
States to Brussels
so we are now the largest open
source foundation in Europe, and host quite
a few projects, many of which are related
to European regulation and the search for
Europeans as strategic independence.
I think thatthe role the communities play
is vast,because obviously the code that
runs
all of these systems are incredibly
important.
And I just recently read a quote.
Some of you might have heard of this.
It's malus.sh, M-A-L-U-S.
It's sort of a parody website that has a
mechanism by which you can reverse engineer
open source projects using AI andbasically
makes the claim so
we don't need open source
anymore.
And I had a quote in there thatI really
find really fun
sort of matches on this question
which is thatthe global economy now runs
on open source code
which is now runs on open
source code, which is technically owned by
no one, which is maintained by developers
WHO are technically employed by no
one,governed by licenses which
are technically read by
no one, which is sort of true, only sort
of true.
It is a miracle of human cooperation,also
froma fiduciary standpoint
completely insane.
And I just want to plant thatseed,because
like the way thatthe world works
and I really
strongly believe that open source, I'm
sorry, it runs the world, it really does.
No one could have ever designed this system
that we have had, that we have today.
It is evolved through steps by things like
Brian did, you know, many years ago and all
the evolution,and then,you know,we've now
got the attention of governments as
communities
and Nitya mentioned the Cyber Resilience
Act.
I mean,up until three years ago whenthat
was first being drafted,I was
I think I would
have said somewhat proudly that I had
never been involved in a policy discussion.
And then the first draft of the CRA came
out andI would call that
from my perspective
a near-death experience.
It was, it was, it would have been horrific,
it really, honestly it would have been.
And it was,it was entirely withgood
intentions,but we had to really buckle down and
engage
with policy makers in ways that we had
never done before.
And I think thatthat really sort of sets
the stage,it's what you see now from
open source
communities andopen source foundations is
a much stronger
sustained investment in dealing
with policy makers, dealing with
governments.
And I think that that ultimately is a very
positive outcome from what could have been
a very negative event. So I'm very
optimistic about the future.
I think that there's been more conversations
between governments and societies and open
source foundations and communities than
there ever have been in the past.
So yes, so I remain relentlessly optimistic
that this is only going to get better.
Wonderful,thank you,and aswe're running
out of time
I'd like to ask one last question
to the whole panel, as governments
increasingly rely on AI.
What are the new dimensions of strategic
independence that
policy makers should be considering?
Who likes to start? Whoever wants.
I'd be happy to comment on a couple of
things and then pass the baton.
I think a lot of people have talked
aboutdata,getting your data house in order
break down
the silos in government data, make sure you
understand the provenance of the data, and
do your due diligence on the models that
you use and the data that it uses.
And one last thing I'll say, and then I'll
pass it on to others.
I think governments need to have internal
capacity to evaluate AI systems
independently.
To test real world performance,assess the
risk
and also challenge vendor claims without
this informed procurement is almost
impossible.
I think a lot of the conversation around
AI has been reduced to conversations about
the
large language models when
actually a full AI system is a lot of
things built both underneath
the LLM,but also well above thatat the
layer of harnesses,at the layer of apps that
talk
to the LLMs,those sorts of things,and in
thinking about
strategically what's important
for governments andenterprises of all
sorts to be able to intervene and
modify behavior
and not control, but have agency over and
direct.
I think it's a lot more important that at
the harness layer, at the layer that wraps
around an LLM,that we have capacity andwe
have open source tooling and
we have institutions
that know how to manage the wild and wacky
stuff that might come out of the black box
called the LLM. Thank you.
Yoon. Thank you.
So we had an earlier session on AI
fordigital public goods
where we looked at the fact
that we so far from the digital public goods
alliance perspective, not a single product
yet,AI system,has been certified yet
becauseit's a complex discussion and
complex issue.
It's not just a software thatyou just
install andstart running withit andevolve and
enhance.
There are many aspects andfacets around
this,especially around the data
the safeguarding
of sensitive information of public, of the
citizens and so on and so forth.
And the continuous evolving of the model
andits weights aswell ascontextual as
to where
it's being trained and how it's being
localized in the various places.
So just because it works in one country, it
does not mean it's going to automatically
work in another country.
So this is really a complex discussion,
but however, again, with open source.
I think this is wherethe freedom of
independence comes in,where the localization is
somuch
easier to leverage or to implement and to
be able to continue to leverage and evolve
it, leveraging a larger community of people
that are supporting the various platforms
around the AI and not being, again, locked
into a specific product company or a specific
country or vendor that the product is
being developed from.
And most important, I think, is the
accountability.
The decision that
gets made by the AI at the end of the day
really is owned by the government
itself.
It's not the product or technology
thatmakes the decision
but it's really the government
WHO needs to own it.
So make sure thatthe government has the
institutional capability to monitor and
intervene asneeded
and be able to challenge the decision the
AI is making and
being able to really responsibly
using the AI andthis goes back to the
responsible use of AI is such a critical
important aspect
of how we're leveraging this and
giving more independence to the various
governments WHO
are adapting it and really leveraging it
well.
Thank you.
>> Whenit comes to how AI is going to
impact government
I want to actually take a very
different andquite specific point of
view,which is around the topic of security
cyber
security specifically. So governments all
have digital services.
They have basically -- governments have
basically become the IT department of the
nation.
Remember to get your ass kicked.
More than one thing can be true at the
same time.
So Project Glasswing was an excellent
marketing campaign by anthropic.
It was really well executed.
It's also true thatmythos is a very
powerful model that
delivers lots of vulnerabilities.
More worryingly, what it does is it actually
delivers a playbook, an attack playbook.
So it's not just here's your
vulnerability,it's like
and here's how you exploit it and
here's the script. It's going to be messy.
And every IT department of which
governments are one need to fundamentally
change the way
that they think about their running
systems.
If you are not prepared to repatch and
reboot every server in your infrastructure
several
times a day, you're going to be in
trouble.
And so -- and that's a huge cultural
change.
Every -- I've been an IT.
Every IT department in the planet like --
and you put it up, you stand it up.
If it's work, if it's -- you know, if it
ain't broke, don't fix it, right?
And they just run -- I remember talking to
it like one of my own IT guys
like bragging
about the fact that he hadn't rebooted a
server in nine years.
Hmm. Excellent.
But that's -- andthat has been the
perception of IT departments foras long as
there have
been IT departments. And fundamentally,
that's going to change.
And I think thatwe really have to think
asgovernments
you have to start really thinking
about how you are going to change the
culture and
the security posture in your IT
departments
to be relentlessly using AI on the
defense.
It's not -- because there are definitely
ways to do that.
Again, to Brian's point, you have to have
the right harnesses.
You have to know how to use the right
prompts.
You have to train your people to do this.
But you need to start really using AI to
automate your cyber defense.
Thank you. Dr. Indra. Thank you.
It's already actually addressed by June.
It is very true thatactually is no longer
about
how to focus on the digital data structure
and software itself.
But based on the survey that -- and study
that APOF with our 21-member countries, the
most important is a several aspect.
One is government data governance.
Second, government transparency, government
accountability, even the government human
resources itself that we should be really
know about this new technology.
And lastly, it's about how to manage the
algorithmic risk.
That's also very important.
Because if the government uses the AI system
that finally cannot understand, cannot be
outdated, cannot be explained, then actually
the strategic independence is fragile.
It's nothing actually. This is based on
the study.
And finally,that -- what I would like to
share that
AI sovereignty without the skills
and the governance capacity inside the
government itself
if we want to -- if the government
really want to do this, an open-source
thing, is become a not-released sovereignty.
That's my last statement.
Thank you, Anne. >> Thank you very much.
And as Omar asked me to end this panel, seven
minutes before six, and we now -- no, now
seven minutes on time.
I'd like to thank you, my distinguished
panelists, the big applause for you.
Thank you for your perspectives.
>> And I can thank you, Mike, and indeed,
the software -- open-source runs the world.
And thanks a lot for Adriana.
We did it in purpose to leave our best
speakers at the last to make sure that
you stay all
the way till the end. So please join me
for a big round of applause.
You could do better than that.
This is it. It looks like you survived the
OSPO for a good day.
Congratulations to you as well.
I hope you found it very interesting for the
send-off, for the final, final speaker, and
to close the four days that we had at the
UN.
As you know, open-source week is not over.
There will be a slide at the end where we're
going to show what's happening tomorrow.
A lot of things are happening tomorrow.
The team has been working very hard, led by
a program committee, led by Sachiko, Brian,
and others. So we have 20, no, 30
fantastic sessions for you tomorrow.
That's going to be off-site.
That's our tradition. That the last day is
not -- we don't organize.
We give a space to the community to
organize their own event.
But before that, I want to give a floor to
his execs.
Can I see Mr.
M&D Singh Gill and the Secretary General,
especially in the Voice for Digital
Emerging Technologies. Thank you.
Thank you, Omar. Thank you so much.
And I'll be very brief.
Just a few words of thanks andsome
impressions I have fromthis exciting
wonderful week.
First,the thanks,the co-hosts,partners
WHOhelped us organize this week
all the sponsors
the volunteers. They've done an amazing
job.
Please, round of applause for me.
And you all participants, you know, you
have been amazing.
So thank you.
Now,it's very hard to recap the week,and I
won't even attempt it
so it's just impressions.
I think we experimented this year with a
full day devoted to Open Dash AI.
And we realized, and we heard some of the
practitioners, that we are on a spectrum.
It's a moving dot. It sits somewhere,
depending on context, but it's moving.
The concept is evolving, and it's
important to have this discussion.
You know,sometimes this can be a contentious
discussion,but it's important that
UN remain
in the space where even contested issues
can be discussed constructively.
We also had fromthat day a clear
takeaway,you know,Jan Lekun mentioned it
that excess
doesn't equal capability,and actually
capacity is the bridge between where
technology sits
and where actual outcomes are realized.
So not just Jan Lekun,but ministers
fromJamaica,from other parts of the world
echoed that.
So I think if we were to just capture this
in one sentence,that particular day
I think
the sense was thatwe have to kind of
balance between rented permission and
own capability
in the sweet spot, depending on context.
So that is where agency lies, that's where
sovereignty lies.
So this is more than adoption, perhaps
it's even more than adaptation.
So this is adaptation plus, but we have to
find our own sweet spot.
And then fragmentation is the common
adversary here
and shared inclusive infrastructure
is the response, and that's where open
source becomes such a powerful tool.
And then,you know,the digital public
infrastructure day
which is now a regular feature,I think
this year we saw some very powerful
regional perspectives come together
from the Caribbean
from Maghreb, from Central Asia, and from
of course Europe.
And it was interesting,and speaking to the
ministers later
they really appreciated the
opportunity to learn from each other.
And the deep dive we did intofinancing of
DPIs,also with
some philanthropic foundations
co-developed Axion,the multilateral
development banks,World Bank IDB
that helped us make
it more concrete for the ministers, the
vice ministers that participated.
So there was an honest discussion of gaps
andchallenges,not just building DPI
but how
do we fund it, how do we sustain it.
And one of the things that really resonated
with me was that we have to find, we have
to own it.
So skin in the game,so national budgets,even
if initial bootstrapping comes from
the outside
national budgets have to have lines for
DPIs.
These are the digital roads and rails on
which everyone can travel to the future.
So we must ensure that,you know,we are
maintaining them,fixing the portals
ensuring reliability
and keeping it safe and accessible for all
users.
Now,coming to this day,the auspose
forgood,really the heart of the week
I think my impression
is that the community stays the
centerpiece.
So this was always our first objective,how
to bring the community together
make it stronger
make it more diverse, and make it more, in a
sense, relevant for the time we are living.
So we saw that, highly engaged room, packed
room, so growing momentum behind open and
collaborative approaches,many of the
projects andinitiatives you heard about
you know
not only from the UN, but also outside,
you know, they demonstrate that.
So the community is ready to go from these
positive vibes, these principles to actual
action.
So there were some nice moments for us, you
know, the report on AI as a digital public
good
the launch of the open source enablement
compass to track how the member states are
doing in their open source adoption
journey.
So some markers, in fact, as we go ahead and
we heard from directors from different UN
entities, UNESCO, FAO, UNRWA, how this is so
important from the perspective of the reform
of the organization, the UN80 process where
we deliver better, deliver stronger, deliver
together with some challenges on
resources.
Now,there was one last element thatI
wanted to say,community staying strong
community
coming together, translating principles into
practice, but then how do we go from here
to next year? I think this is where your
valuable feedback will help us.
We've done some things, hopefully better
than last year, this time around, but next
year we want to make some more
improvements,perhaps look at,you know
how this community
can reorient in the direction of some of
the challenges thatthe AI turn faces
data availability
of high quality and diverse data.
So how could data commons be one of the
additional responsibilities of the open
source community
apart from the code side, the model side?
And then there are values that we need to
rally behind, that we need to take forward.
There is some interest politically these
days in digital sovereignty
open sources having
its moment in the sun in that context, you
know, sometimes political trends, you know,
they evolve, they get on to the next
challenge.
So how do we stay true to our values?
How do we ride these political waves up
and down?
I think those would be important
considerations aswe plan for
the next open source week.
So you'll soon get to the GitHub perception,and
then tomorrow is the community day
where
I think more excitement is in store.
So thank you very much and look forward to
seeing you next year.
Again,thank you very much,and the
Secretary-General forclosing and
summarizing all what happened
this week.
It's been very, very intense four days, full
of learning, full of panels and keynotes
and fireside chats, and most importantly,
hallway talks and lunches and coffees.
I hope everybody managed to get the best
out of the conference
expanded their network
met amazing people.
I'm sure I hope a lot of new initiatives
are all going to start from here, and with
that, I am happy to close the day, but
before that, we have one last slide.
I promise this is it. We have one last
slide about what's happening tomorrow.
Tomorrow, as you know, it's not happening
here, this is the tradition that we don't host
the last day. The last day is your day.
It's the community WHO runs it.
And our incredible program committee led
by Sacheco have done a lot of work.
They did a call, and something like 250
sessions were submitted from 50 countries.
They sorted through.
They read through every abstract, everything,
and then they made sure to sort only the
very best. They combined.
They concentrated. Those 20-plus sessions,
110 speakers.
So literally, the community is talking to
the community.
We have no business with that day.
That's the day that is run by you, run for
you.
Not even hosted here, hosted outside of
premise.
So thanks to Red Hat WHO are hosting us
over there.
We look forward to seeing all of you there
tomorrow.
And just too close,just want to thank the
team WHOhas been wonderful
putting everything
together. It's an incredible work.
As every event, there were 120 dramas in
the background, but a good event is an event
where nobody noticed the drama.
So I'm very happy about that, but we would
never have been done.
We would never be able to do it without my
colleagues.
So Zaina, Mitusha, Moritz, of course, all our
partners, Francesco, Toby, Brian, Carolyn.
Oh, of course, of course, of course,
there's just so many.
It took an amazing collective effort to
get to this.
And I think with this, I'll see you next
year.
And I promise, it's not going to be open
source month.
We're starting our open source week.